Ubiquity
========

This is a graphical installer for Ubuntu, written largely in Python, using
d-i as a backend for many of its functions. The authors are indebted to the
efforts of the Guadalinex project in developing the original
"ubuntu-express" code used as a basis for this project.

Background
----------

Around 2000, the debian-installer (later just "d-i") project started to
replace the old Debian "boot-floppies" installer. The goals of this project
included long-term maintainability, modularity, and code reuse. After a
hiatus during the Debian 3.0 release, this project matured into a usable
installer in 2004 in time for, among others, the releases of Debian 3.1 and
Ubuntu 4.10. From Ubuntu 4.10 to Ubuntu 5.10, d-i was used as the primary
installation program.

d-i continues to provide flexibility and (for a certain significant class of
users) ease of use that a simplified graphical installer will always be
hard-pushed to provide. It is therefore important to continue to support it
in Ubuntu. From a maintainability point of view, it follows that it is
important for any graphical installer supported by Ubuntu to share
substantial amounts of code with d-i, particularly where the backend logic
is intrinsically difficult and has accumulated large quantities of expertise
and bug fixes. Accordingly, Ubiquity is designed to use logic from d-i where
possible, and tries to confine itself to being a high-quality frontend.

(Of course, there remain some areas where d-i does not provide suitable
logic, or where its logic has not proven amenable to direct use within
Ubiquity, so there is still some backend-style logic and code duplication
in Ubiquity. Eventually, as much of this as possible should go away.)

UI Design
---------

The primary focus of Ubiquity's UI is ease of use for new users.
Accordingly, it does not try to provide all possible options, deferring
advanced installation scenarios to d-i so that it does not have to be all
things to all people. See http://wiki.ubuntu.com/UbuntuExpress for the
original details of its user interface design.

Debconf Integration
-------------------

The most challenging part of Ubiquity to understand is undoubtedly its
integration with d-i. Before getting to grips with this, I assume that the
reader has a basic developer-level grasp of the "debconf" configuration
system. Reading the debconf-devel(7) man page is a good idea.

d-i uses debconf for all user interaction. The extant graphical debconf
frontends are functional, but crude from a human interface design
perspective; although this could be improved, the problem is to some extent
intrinsic because they must generate a user interface based on the questions
asked by the confmodule. It is possible to do much better using custom user
interface code. However, at present debconf has no support for doing this
directly (although cdebconf does).

To deal with this, Ubiquity uses the noninteractive debconf frontend, and
instead uses a layer called the "debconffilter". This sits between d-i code
and the debconf frontend, intercepting the debconf protocol, and transforms
relevant debconf protocol messages into events which can be handled in much
the same way as UI events from widget libraries like GTK+ or Qt. While this
requires insider knowledge of the questions which may be asked by each piece
of d-i code, which must often be updated as d-i evolves, it seems to be the
most practical approach at present.

Each piece of d-i code used in Ubiquity is accompanied by a "component",
written in Python, which defines the backend code to be called and any
necessary event handlers. To allow for multiple frontend implementations, it
typically calls methods in the frontend when UI operations are needed.

It is important to remember that each call to component event handlers is
blocking (though non-reentrant). If UI interaction is required in order to
provide an answer to debconf, this must be handled by calling into suitable
frontend functions from the component to wait for the user. The component is
responsible for maintaining its own state machine if necessary.

Partitioning
------------

At present, automatic partitioning is handled by d-i code (partman), while
advanced partitioning is handled by embedding gparted or qtparted in
Ubiquity's interface. This has a number of problems, and we plan to replace
this scheme by using partman throughout together with a custom-written
partitioning frontend.

Installation
------------

The actual installation takes place by copying the read-only part of the
live filesystem. The writable part of the live filesystem (i.e. the running
live session) is intentionally not copied, to ensure maximum reproducibility
of the installed system. Thus, any customisations applied by the live boot
process must be re-applied after the read-only filesystem is copied. The
live boot process is responsible for installing hooks in
/usr/lib/ubiquity/target-config/ to take care of this.

After copying the live filesystem, certain unnecessary packages (such as
Ubiquity itself) will be removed. The set of packages to be removed is
computed by taking those packages present in
/cdrom/casper/filesystem.manifest but not present in
/cdrom/casper/filesystem.manifest-desktop, and removing any packages
explicitly requested for installation by installer code. Language packs for
languages which are not to be supported on the installed system will also be
removed.

Logs of the installation will be saved in /var/log/installer/syslog (for
messages emitted by Ubiquity itself), /var/log/syslog (for some messages
emitted by d-i code), and /var/log/partman (for a trace of the operation of
the automatic partitioner). /var/log/installer/syslog and /var/log/partman
are saved in /var/log/installer/ on the installed system. In future,
/var/log/installer/syslog and /var/log/syslog will be consolidated in order
to reduce confusion and to allow /var/log/syslog to be saved on the
installed system as well.

Customisation
-------------

Where d-i code is used, it is generally possible to preseed it to change
default behaviour. See the installation guide for details. However, at
present Ubiquity will not skip over preseeded steps. This may be fixed in
the future.

The read-only live filesystem should generally be mounted on /rofs.
Alternatively, an image may be present as /cdrom/casper/filesystem.cloop,
/cdrom/casper/filesystem.squashfs, or (for Guadalinex/Metadistros)
/cdrom/META/META.squashfs.


Feel free to ask me (Colin Watson <cjwatson@ubuntu.com>) if you have any
questions regarding Ubiquity's workings.
